The only thing that holds many of us back
from using the power of intention,
prayer, and focused meditation
is a belief issue.
Does it really work?
Lynne McTaggart has devoted several years
chronicling the scientific study
of this phenomenon known as ‘The Power of Intention’
and has come back with an unmitigated “Yes,
“it does work.”
(soft music)
As a truly top-notch journalist
you had come in contact with some of the most
powerful people on the planet in the world
of quantum physics, in the world of parapsychology,
and really honed in on the subject of intention,
which effects every one of us.
And now here we are, ‘Intention Experiment,’
and this is a vast project; how did all of your work
culminate in this?
When I finished ‘The Field,’ which required that I
talk to quantum physicists all around the planet
to try to understand why things like spiritual healing
work and homeopathy work, I put together
all of their work into a synthesis that suggested
that consciousness is a living thing, an actual energy,
with the ability to change physical matter.
And this is the unfinished business I was left with
after finishing that book.
I wanted to know, being the kind of
practical person that I am, fact-based person I am,
how far can you go with this?
What can you do with intention?
You know, can I help my children pass their math tests
with my thoughts?
And more importantly, can I use my thoughts
to do something to alleviate the vast catalogue
of suffering on the planet?
So I wanted to find out about this,
and I also wanted to know about the mechanism
by which intention works.
You know, what science out there could explain this to me?
So I went back to scientists,
and I also wanted to find out about group thought.
You know, does this magnify when lots of people
are thinking the same thought at the same time?
But the science that I came up with
on that regard was very tantalizing, but inconclusive.
So I was mulling this over one night with my husband
and he turned to me and he said,
“Why don’t you do these experiments yourself?”
And I thought, ‘That sounds really ridiculous,’
because you know, I’m not a physicist,
I’m not any kind of a scientist.
But as I started to think about it
I thought, ‘Well, one thing I do have
‘is a lot of participants in the form of my readers.
‘I’ve got readers all over the globe.
‘So perhaps if invite them to be part of this experiment
‘we’ll have the largest mind-over-matter experiment
‘in history.’
And so that’s what I decided to do:
make it a living book,
so that the book doesn’t really have an ending.
It is all about the science of intention,
and what makes you a master of intention,
and what kind of practical techniques you can use,
but it’s also an invitation for readers
to come on periodically, come on our website,
and work with me working with scientists around the globe
sending intention to particular targets.
And our targets are all philanthropic,
they all have a philanthropic implication.
Mm, and you’re dealing with
some really top-notch scientists and physicists
in this project, and did you have a lot of help
in modeling this to begin with?
Oh definitely, I mean, I’m not a scientist,
as I say, I might have an idea, but I will go
to one of my scientists, and they include
Dr. Gary Schwartz, a psychologist
at the University of Arizona,
Fritz Albert Popp, who is a German physicist
in Neuss, Germany
at the International Institute of Biophysics,
Konstantin Korotkov, a well known Russian physicist,
and now we have Rustum Roy, who is probably
the world’s greatest authority on water,
at Arizona State University.
He’s now come on board.
Rupert Sheldrake is helping me;
the famous British biologist,
and many people like that.
So this is truly a global laboratory.
So where did...
Shall we go back and visit a couple of the
early intention experiments,
just to give a little bit of framework for this?
I love the work that was done with plants
with Cleve Backster.
Some of that was just really interesting.
You want to go back into that for a moment,
and some of what really piqued you
when you got into this subject,
and we’ll just start laying a bit of a framework,
and then we’re gonna jump into your experiment.
Okay.
Well Cleve Backster isn’t a scientist.
He’s the country’s leading lie detector expert,
and he got involved purely by accident.
He was sitting in his office one night, bored,
and he looked over at one of his plants,
it was a dracaena, cane plant,
and he thought to himself,
‘I wonder what would happen if I hooked it up
‘to one of my polygraph machines.’
So he did, and at the time, this is in the 1960’s,
polygraph equipment consisted of a set of electrodes
attached to a readout mechanism that
is like a pen describing a sideways “S.”
And if you’re telling the truth it’s a small “s,”
if you’re lying it’s a great, big “S.”
So he attached his plant to this piece of equipment
and he thought to himself, ‘Well, let’s see what happens
‘when I pour some water in.’
So he did, and the plant acted as though it were
bored, you know?
If the plant was a human being
it would be sort of saying to itself,
“Ho hum, ho hum.”
So he thought to himself again,
‘Well maybe I have to do something
‘a little bit more drastic.
‘Maybe I’ll burn its leaf.
(laughs) That’s so cruel!
I know, absolutely!
And at the very moment he thought that,
the plant went wild!
The readout mechanism started describing this giant “S”
as though the plant were stressed!
And he kept thinking the thought,
he went and he got some matches,
he lit the matches, and the plant was going crazy.
So he finally stopped thinking this,
and the plant also calmed down
and the “s” became smaller.
So he thought to himself at that point,
‘What was that?
‘This plant has just read my thoughts!’
So for the next 40 years Cleve Backster
went about trying to figure out what he had just witnessed.
He set up all kinds of experiments, not only with plants,
but with eggs, and yogurt, and bacteria,
even human sperm,
just testing what he thought
to call “primary perception,” which was
the ability of other living things
to pick up and read the thoughts around them,
and this kind of transmission and reception
that’s going on all the time between living things.
He had some amazing results.
He had an automated system
whereby he had a little batch of brine shrimp
and at a certain point when he flipped a switch
the brine shrimp would go into some boiling water
and die, and at that moment his plants, who were
hooked up to polygraph machines, would all register
alarm, and Backster, who was a great fan of Star Wars...
Used to say, “It was like Yoda, when Yoda says,
“ ‘I feel a disturbance in the Force.’ “
It was like they had felt some kind of disturbance
in the field.
And another part you wrote about,
within his work, which was interesting, was
the plants had even come to a point
where they could discern whether or not he was
serious in his threats as to harming them, and
I thought that was very intriguing.
Very, very unsettling too, because
he was working one day with a famous remote viewer,
Ingo Swann, and Swann wanted to replicate
what Backster had done, so he also thought
about burning the leaf of the plant
and the plant initially registered alarm
on the polygraph machine,
and then it stopped.
And Backster and Swann looked at each other
and said, “What was that?
“Is this a plant learning curve?
“The plant actually knows I’m not being serious
“so it stopped being upset.”
And that also was more evidence
of this two-way flow of information,
and that the plant has some kind of
basic consciousness.
So at the time, I mean no one took Backster seriously,
because as I say he wasn’t a scientist, and it was
many, many years ago,
but subsequently scientists like German physicist
Fritz Albert Popp have discovered that
all living things are emitting tiny, tiny currents of light,
and those currents of light are being picked up
by other living things, and in a sense replied to.
So Backster intuitively understood this,
and had demonstrated it in these kind of crude experiments,
but it took someone like Popp to show that Backster
had been right all along.
And he showed it through this mechanism.
Right, and he’s popping up a lot.
The work of Fritz Albert Popp is coming up a lot
I’m hearing, as I’m interviewing various people.
A lot of his work seems key, because
we’re really going into the realm of light,
slash information.
Yes.
He is so important, because
he offers us a mechanism by which
thoughts can be transmitted
and can have an effect.
So from there,
do you feel comfortable at this point
kind popping along into the experiment itself?
Because there’s a lot within this.
Or would you like to give a little bit more background?
I just had to have you do the Cleve Backster thing
because it’s so visceral and fun.
Everybody can see this one.
I know, exactly.
Well I guess everybody should understand that
there’s a vast body of research about the science
of intention, and many, many scientists
in many labs around the world
have been able to demonstrate that
thoughts are not only things, but things that effect
other things, and that they’ve been able to demonstrate
through very, very good, rigorous trials
that thoughts can effect sensitive equipment
like random event generators,
which are 21st century tosses of the coin.
Very, very sensitive mechanisms.
And through hundreds of thousands of trials
Princeton University has shown that people
have a small, measurable effect
on these machines in sending them one way
versus another way.
There’ve been wonderful studies done by many,
many scientists showing that we can effect living things.
Everything from single-celled organisms
to full-fledged human beings.
There’ve been fantastic studies showing that
time and space don’t matter.
Just what I was going to ask you next.
Go for it!
(laughing)
Many studies, like the Princeton REG machines,
it didn’t seem to matter whether or not
somebody was sitting in front of the machine
and sending an intention to it,
or 10,000 miles away.
Again, random event generators.
Just in case.
Yeah.
They’re random even generators, which are
usually a computerized display of,
say, two images that go back and forth.
Let’s say cowboys and indians.
The computer will show cowboys sometimes,
indians sometimes, and when left to its own devices,
those images will show up about 50% of the time each time.
When someone sits down in front of it and sends an intention
for, say, more indians, over many, many thousands of trials
they’ve demonstrated that people can produce more indians.
But as I say, it doesn’t matter whether or not they’re
sitting in front of the computer, or 3,000 miles away.
And we found that with our own intention experiments.
I’ve done some sending intention with a group
in Sydney, Australia to Tuscon, Arizona,
and we have the same effect as someone
standing in that lab.
So distance doesn’t seem to make any difference,
nor does time.
There’ve been many studies,
many, many studies, showing that you can send
an intention today to effect something tomorrow
or three weeks from now.
You can send an intention today
to effect something that occurred 3 weeks ago.
So again, with the random even generators,
it didn’t matter.
Time was irrelevant.
In fact...
The fellow who ran these studies,
Robert Jahn, the former Dean of Engineering
at Princeton University, once turned to me
when I said “How can this be?”
And he said, “Well take time out of it, Lynne,
“and it all makes sense.”
That’s right, yeah.
And then you’re getting into hyperspace,
and it gets interesting when you start looking,
looking past time and past space.
Very spooky.
Very spooky, but we’ll just
say we all understand that there are
other forces at work.
So you talk a lot about the zero point field,
and how does the belief in the zero point field
allow for what you’re talking about here?
The non-locality to exist outside of the quantum world.
Okay, well the zero point field, for anyone who doesn’t
understand this, is the universal energy field
that unites us like an invisible web.
It’s created by the sub-atomic dance that goes on
in the quantum world.
Sub-atomic particles aren’t little billiard balls
like we think of when we study physics,
but they’re more like a vibrating packet of energy
and they trade energy back and forth
a little like a game of tennis.
Energy goes from one to the other constantly
in a non-stop process, and in that process
a theme called a virtual particle gets created
by this energy pass.
It only exists for less than the blink of an eye.
And it’s not much energy really, when you
consider that one exchange; only about a half a watts worth
of energy; but if you magnify that by all the energy
exchanges between all the sub-atomic particles
in all the things in all the universe,
you come up with this unfathomable,
enormous energy network
existing out there in empty space
like a super-charged backdrop.
Isn’t it a field of potential?
It’s a field of potential, absolutely.
There’s two really important things about this.
One is, it’s a mechanism by which we are all connected.
Because if we are all trading information at the lowest
nether-most level of our being,
then we are connected to the furthest reaches of the cosmos,
because energy waves are infinite.
The other thing that’s really important
about the zero point field is it’s like a giant memory bank,
because waves encode information when
they bump into each other, and so this energy field
is (stammers) like a shadowed universe
of everything that ever was.
And it’s growing more intelligent as time goes on.
So we tap into when we have any of those
extra-sensory experiences that we all have,
and don’t know how to name.
We’re tapping into the field.
And when we have instantaneous connections,
as we often times do, here is a mechanism
by which this could occur.
Mm-hmm.
Now let’s take it into
your work, your experiment,
the intention experiment now, taking this bit.
And I know that we’ve just barely
scratched the surface, but the reality is
we could sit here and talk for the next 24 hours
on tape, so we’re going to assume that people
are going to pick up the first book,
the original book that you wrote on this called ‘The Field,’
and then move forward into this one,
and then get all the juicy details about
the historical precedence for this
in the world of science and physics.
So that said, let’s hop forward now to
‘The Intention Experiment’ and where,
once you gathered your team of scientists together,
where you began with this, and how you started
applying it in terms of the numbers of people involved,
the kind of experiments you’re doing, and so forth.
I started with a pilot study that I wanted to include
in the book, and I had to say to myself
and say to the readers,
“I don’t know if this is gonna work.
“This is something that hasn’t been tried before
“on this level, let’s just give it a go.”
So I started out with 16 experienced meditators,
and I took experienced meditators because
it was apparent to me from the research I had done
in the Intention Experiment that experience counts.
That there are certain techniques that make one
a good intender, all shared by masters of intention,
like qigong masters, master healers, buddhist monks,
and I had interviewed many of all that category
to try to understand which one of those techniques
and which batch of techniques worked the best
and were common among all of these groups.
What made you a good intender?
And to distill from that a program that people could use
to improve their own intention.
So with my pilot study I wanted to start with people
who knew what they were doing,
they knew how to focus their minds,
because that is one of the key elements,
one of the first...
Elements of any process of using intention;
focusing your mind, getting into a meditative state.
So I gathered them together on a very rainy night
in London, and we got together and we sent
intention to four targets in Germany.
And all I did was show my group
photos of the four targets, which
were two kinds of algae,
a jade plant, and a woman.
And in each instance we were trying
to effect the light emissions, the bio-photon emissions,
coming off of these living things.
And all we wanted to see was if we could
have an effect.
Now, where I am in London is about 300 miles,
300-400 miles away from Germany, so we
had a distance as well.
Afterward Fritz Popp did the calculations,
and we sent intention on all for 10 minutes.
So if we were having any kind of an effect
we should have a zig-zag pattern.
The scientists also didn’t know
when we were sending intention,
we just gave them a six hour window,
and we sent intention during two of those six hours.
Afterward, after they did their calculations
we unblinded the study and we sure enough had an effect.
Definitely we were effecting all the light emissions,
and I have to say that Fritz Popp was quite surprised
by the results, as was I.
Mm-hmm.
Very interesting thing too, because
the algae in the picture that I showed people
was some algae in Dr. Popp’s office,
not the algae we were sending intention to.
It was just some algae I photographed
when I went over to see him.
So it seemed from that first little experiment
that any sort of thing, like a photo,
even suggesting the target is enough
to zero-in the mind on the appropriate target.
So from there, when I wanted to roll this
out to readers, and to conferences,
I spoke to a number of the scientists
and Dr. Gary Schwartz, at the University of Arizona,
very generously came forward and offered to be
and to run these first experiments.
So I started thinking about, and when I had originally
thought of the intention experiments, I started
kicking around things like trying to cure
attention deficit in a child,
or trying to take on somebody with cancer.
Something big, philanthropic; saving somebody
from a burning building.
Then Gary turned to me and said, “Great.
“So let’s start with a leaf.”
And I was really deflated.
Totally deflated!
(laughing)
I thought, ‘Oh no, how am I going to...
‘How am I going to ignite the world-mind
‘on fire with a leaf?’
But as Gary—
It’s very methodical this way,
very thorough.
Exactly.
And he said to me, “Look,
“we’re trying to do something
“that’s never been tried before.
“We’ve got to start with baby steps.”
And so we said, “Okay, let’s just see if we can
“have any kind of effect.
“Let’s do something similar to the Fritz Popp study
“that I had run, but let’s have a control leaf.”
So we decided to do this for the first time
in front of a conference that I was running
in March of 2007.
We had about 400 people in the audience
and we had the two leaves via web-cam images.
We put them up, we had the audience choose which one.
The scientists back in Tucson, Arizona, who have
the two leaves there, didn’t know which ones we were
sending intention to.
And we did for 10 minutes,
and we decided to make our intention
to increase this light, to make the leaf glow.
So we sent intention to just one leaf.
And afterward Dr. Schwartz and his team
put these leaves in special equipment that
not only counts them every photon, you know,
photon by photon it counts all these emissions,
but also can photograph them,
and photograph this living light.
They’re highly sensitive equipment.
So he did this, and after he finished his calculations
I unblinded it, and he said, “Wow.
“You should see these results, Lynne.
“The leaf sent intention is truly glowing.
“And the leaf not sent intention
“is dark, it’s even darker than usual.
“There might be some sort of neglect effect here.”
So we were really encouraged by this,
and we then rolled it out on the internet.
We invited people around the world
to take part, and we had over 7,000 people
coming on all at the same time
and they sent an intention,
and similarly to make, in this case I think it was
seeds, to make them glow, we had an effect.
We ran it again in front of an audience,
another audience, we had an effect.
So Dr. Schwartz and I moved on to something
a little more practical.
We wanted to see if we could make a plant grow faster
by sending intention.
So we decided to take four batches of seeds,
so we’d have one batch of seeds that were our
target seeds, and three controls.
And we would pick one of the four sets,
the scientists once again wouldn’t know what
we were doing, and afterward they would,
after we’d sent intention, they would plant
all four sets of seeds and then measure them
over a couple of weeks to see which ones were
sprouting earlier and growing fastest.
So we did our first experiment
from Sydney, Australia.
I was speaking in front of a group.
I was speaking in front of groups all around the world,
so this gave me really a terrific opportunity
to do this.
I had about 500 people in the audience,
we all sent intention to one set of seeds.
We decided it by, you know, somebody
in the audience just randomly choosing.
That one.
Yeah, exactly.
And afterward Dr. Schwartz planted all four sets of seeds.
I unblinded it afterward, after he’d taken his calculations,
lo and behold: we had an effect.
The seeds sent intention grew much faster
and quicker than the others.
So we did it again
in front of a little group in Rhinebeck, New York,
on the internet once again with thousands of people
from many, many countries around the world...
With a group of healers in South Carolina,
and each time we had a significant effect.
But with the healers we had the biggest effect of all.
The plant actually grew twice as large
as the controls.
So that was our first indication
with a scientific study that experience counts.
That using certain techniques as an intention experimenter
really counts.
So I’ve been encouraging people since
who have taken part to familiarize themselves
with my ‘Powering Up’ program, as I call it.
Which is this distillation of processes
from master healers and master intenders
so that they can maximize their effect.
Let’s talk about some of the masters,
some specifics.
One example you used that I love
is Muhammad Ali.
But there are others as well.
Let’s just get an example of a few
individuals or types of individuals
you’ve seen just astounding coherence with
and effect.
Okay, Muhammad Ali is very interesting
as an example of intention mastery,
because everybody used to discredit and laugh at
his little techniques, and think that this was just
an example of ego, but recently Ali, like many
elite athletes, has admitted that he was using
mind control techniques and affirmation techniques,
or what we would call intention techniques, to win.
Now if you look at what he was doing,
he used just about every intention trick in the book.
For instance, people talk about using affirmation.
I cannot think of a better affirmation
than “I am the greatest.”
Right.
(laughs) You know, you really can’t
think of one better than that.
But also if you look at his little
rhyming things that he was using,
his little rhyming quatrains,
he would say things like,
“Archie Moore is sure to hit the floor at 4.”
And if you actually look and review that fight,
you’ll see that Archie Moore, sure enough,
was knocked out in the fourth round.
So in a sense, Ali was giving himself intentions
in disguise.
Right.
And he even used a voodoo doll,
and there’s a lot of lore about negative intention
and voodoo dolls, you know, things like pointing
the bone, that actually are demonstrated to work.
But in this case Ali had a little gorilla in his top pocket
in the Joe Frazier fight, which was the
“Thriller in Manila” fight.
(laughs)
I remember it.
Well he pulled it out every time he saw a journalist,
and he’d start punching it, and he’d say
“It’s gonna be a killer and a chiller
“in Manila when I get the gorilla.”
Pow, pow, pow.
And by the time he got to the ring,
Frazier was probably really unsettled.
I think in his own mind he had become something
less than human.
So Ali was using all these kinds of mind tricks
but other elite athletes now routinely use a thing
called “mental rehearsal”
to focus and prepare themselves, and also
rehearse every move, because they all understand
that the mind can’t really distinguish between
a thought and an action.
And that the body believes that it is
going through the action when it just
mentally rehearses it.
And it makes those same neural connections
to the muscles, so in a sense paves the way
for the action to follow.
Let’s talk about in the spiritual realms
of mastery, and moving into the subject
of coherence.
Most of the intention masters that I spoke with
and interviewed and sent questionnaires to
used a series of very similar techniques.
They would work on some kind of focus,
and it didn’t seem to matter which technique they used,
whether it was using meditation with a mantra,
or a tone, or drums, or sounds, of their breath,
or their rosary beads.
It all seemed to work, it all focused the mind
away from the chatter of the every day
to a deeper level, and once they were there
they would work hard on uncoupling from the ego.
They moved aside into a more, as some of them described,
“impersonal space,” where they had basically
made contact with the field.
So that’s a really important thing too,
is working on techniques that will
shed the ego so that you are
in a sense one with the field,
and you have removed this sense of separation
with which we usually live our lives.
They all talked about using compassion,
sending out their intention from the heart.
It seemed to work best with intention masters
if the subject of their intention had similar beliefs.
It also seemed to work best
when the intention master was feeling well in himself.
I think what’s very important is,
and you see this in many studies,
is the healer needs to be healed
before the healer does the healing.
The lovely thing is,
in chapter 13 of your book you really give
a very, I think, a very coherent description
of how people can go through and start building
this mastery themselves, and not just from
your own experience, but from the experience
of many; some people that have, uh...
Are well respected in this field.
So I just want to say that.
Now, once someone reads this book,
if they’re not an experienced meditator
they can go in and start learning how
to go in to these states to be able
to be effective in intention.
So with that said,
let’s go back to your experiment
and where you started going after the plants.
Okay, in terms of studying?
Yes.
Well, I wanted to look
at other things like negative intention,
because many people ask me,
“Oh, positive intention must be more powerful
“than negative intention.”
And so I wondered about that.
You know, are thought to harm more powerful
than our thoughts to heal?
And sadly, negative intention,
from data that I’ve seen,
is every bit as powerful as positive intention.
There’ve been many studies of
people asked to kill something.
Now of course studies in a lab
don’t allow us to kill any kind of creature,
much less a human being,
so they’ve had to do them on micro-organisms,
and they’ve found, they’ve done all kinds of studies
on things like e coli bacteria, showing that when
someone sends an intention to increase it,
so a positive intention, that works.
When someone tells them to send,
when someone’s asked to send a negative intention,
to kill it, that works too.
And of course that’s the kind of thing that we use
all the time.
Many patients, with cancer for instance,
told to visualize will send an intention
to kill the cancer.
Or if they have an infection
to kill the micro-organism,
to kill the infection.
So that was really intriguing to me,
and I wondered how do you protect yourself?
I was really concerned about that.
And there’ve been a couple of studies
examining just that, where they’ve asked people
to maintain a mental block against intention.
Um, where somebody is sending an intention
to them, and they’re supposed to form a psychic bubble
of some sort.
And some of them work and some of them don’t.
So I thought to myself, ‘Well, that’s not very
‘conclusive, and it’s also not a very good thing
‘to do, I don’t think.’
To walk around sort of self-enclosed
in a psychic bubble, sort of separating yourself
even more from the world.
So I started pondering this, and I was very interested
in the work of Dr. John Diamond, who wrote
‘Your Body Doesn’t Lie,’
and had really developed more than anyone else,
earlier than anyone else, the whole concept of
behavioral kinesiology.
Using kinesiology, the muscle testing,
to determine whether somebody is effected
by toxic thoughts.
And Dr. Diamond has a wonderful idea
he calls “the homing thought.”
Which is having someone maintain and keep
aware of the thought that they were put on this earth
to do, the activity that brings them in touch with
the divine.
He calls “cantillation” and and I think this is
absolutely brilliant because he’s done many
thousands of tests on subjects when they
kept that “homing thought” as he calls it
in place, and he’s found that that seems
to guard and protect against negativity
more than anything.
Their arms, when they keep their homing thought
strong, stays strong.
That makes sense.
When you’re connected with the essential
nature of your being.
Yes, exactly.
Don’t diffuse yourself or lose yourself.
Exactly.
Let’s talk about negative self-chat,
which isn’t exactly intention,
but which people participate in
sometimes a good percentage of their waking hours.
Well you know, I think it does become intention.
I think that’s a really good question because
you know, people think intention has to be this kind of
mental oomph where you’re just projecting your awareness
and really, really efforting to make that thing happen.
And I’m not so sure this is the case after studying this,
because it’s clear that we’re sending out
transmissions all the time with our light emissions.
And it’s clear that a thought is part of that transfer.
So if all of this is clear, most of us are beaming out
negative information most of the time.
All of that negative chat, as you say,
is there like a running commentary.
‘How did you muff that today?’
And that kind of thing, that just negative
self-critical stuff and that judgmental stuff
about other people, and that I think
after a while becomes your intention.
I think that becomes your life’s intention
if you aren’t careful about it.
That’s a very interesting take on it.
Let’s reverse it to positive and go back
to positive and some of the types of experiments
you and your group have been doing
and some of the effects of it, and also
I would really want to get into
how we can not only participate
with you, but how we can participate
even individually or within our own little clusters too.
Some effective ways to go about that.
Okay, well, from plants and seeds
we moved onto water, because again I wanted
to move eventually onto some sort of practical
experiment that would heal world.
And I wanted to make it clear that I
decided to do philanthropic targets because
a lot of people talk about personal manifestation
and of course my book’s about that too,
but I felt that if we’re going to get people together
in a group, I don’t think it’s about winning the lottery.
I think we ought to put people together to try to heal
that catalogue of suffering I was talking about earlier.
I think there’s a lot we’ve got to do together,
and if we can demonstrate we can do some of this
with our thoughts, we can empower people
who at the moment are feeling a little bit lonely
and they’re feeling very powerless.
So we started with water, and once again
we had to start with baby steps.
I got together with Dr. Konstantin Korotkov,
who is the famous Russian physicist
who discovered and created GDV machines,
which can measure this light and relate it to
the human aura, and he is able to measure this light
in real-time through a very interesting
collection of equipment, and we’ve done experiments
together on the stage where he’s been able
to have someone send love, a positive intention,
to someone else, while this light is being measured
and show up on the stage that their light is changing.
And similarly when a negative intention is sent to someone
then the light changes too.
So we decided that we wanted to see if we could
effect what is called the “cluster structure” of water.
Dr. Masaru Emoto’s work and such?
In this case without doing crystals,
as Emote does, but looking at um...
The light emissions from water, cause water
also has light, and water also emits light,
so we wanted to just see if we could change that again,
just to see if we have a subtle change.
So the first, Dr. Korotkov wanted us
to just try sending love,
which is very much like Emoto’s study,
and just see what we could do.
So we did, and we had a big effect.
Then we decided to be a little more specific,
because a lot of my research demonstrates
that being specific also matters
when you’re sending an intention.
We found in our plant study
that it worked even better when we went from
just a nebulous intention to make a plant grow faster,
to actually sending out a psychic order in a sense
saying we’d like it to grow three centimeters
by the fourth day of growing.
So with Dr. Korotkov we then said
“Okay, we’re going to send an intention to make the light
“increase, to make the light glow, to make the water
“glow and glow once again.”
And we had a larger effect the second time.
So now we’re moving into work with Dr. Rustum Roy,
this is the water expert at Arizona State University.
He’s the Professor of Material Science.
And we are working on putting together an experiment
that will try to mutate bacteria in polluted water.
And the reason we’ve done this, is bacteria are
very easy, they very easily mutate,
and there have been some experiments
demonstrating that intentions sent to bacteria
can make it mutate faster or slower.
So it definitely has an effect.
So if we can turn bad bacteria into good bacteria,
that will have an enormous implication
for our ability to clean up polluted water.
So we’re gonna do that, and we’re also working with
Dr. Schwartz on another bunch of series of experiments.
We’ve been in touch with Deepak Chopra
and the Alliance for New Humanity,
who are very interested in working with us
in a new experiment that’ll be
a peace experiment, where we are sending intention
to a particular hot spot in the world,
and seeing if we can lower the crime rate
through sending intention.
Now this is kind of similar to some work
that was done by the TM organization.
John Hagelin, yes.
Yeah, but in that case there was no intentions
set, it was just numbers of meditators
in a certain area, and they found if there were
a certain percentage of meditators in one of
48, I mean they did this in 48 cities,
if there were a certain percentage of meditators
the crime rate went down.
So now we’re going to see what happens
if we gather together thousands of people
and send an intention, a specific intention,
to lower the crime rate by a specific amount.
So that’s in process, and we’ve been also
talking with an association of New Thought Churches,
who would like to get involved as well.
So this is going to be, we hope,
a massive experiment.
Now do you have clusters
of people doing different experiments
at the same time, or at a certain point
I don’t know if you’re still calling it experiments,
or just simply working together in sending intention
for healing purposes or what not.
Are each of the studies very controlled at this point still?
Okay, well the experiments themselves
are highly controlled in that we
are conducting them like any scientific trial
with controls, with certain
very specific scientific parameters.
But I’ve also encouraged people
to do their own informal intention experiments.
For instance on our website
people have begun sending intention to each other
and we also have an intention of the week.
Now, this grew out of a situation that came about
from one of our readers.
His name is Don, and he was a Vietnam Vet
and he has ankylosing spondylitis, which means
his spine his fused and he can’t move at all.
And he wrote in one time and just said,
“I’ll be an intention experiment.
“I’ve had so many medical tests.
“I know exactly what’s possible and what isn’t
“so any change from this would be
“demonstrable effect.”
So the readers themselves got together and started
sending him intention twice a week on their own back,
and I encouraged them to keep a diary.
And he was also full of a lot of pain.
So in a few months, or a few weeks, he said he was
getting better.
Something like six to eight months later
he wrote me back to say he is now virtually pain free,
and he has started to move.
So that was interesting.
So it suggested to us to start
setting up a cyber prayer group.
So every Saturday we put up someone else who is
ill, or is estranged from their family,
or something like that,
and we’ve had two people with cancer
claim that they’ve had spontaneous remissions.
We had a guy going through an operation
who was much better as a result.
He did far better.
We have a couple of MS people
who have done really well.
And we have a woman whose daughter ran away,
16 year old daughter ran away.
They were estranged, and three weeks after
we sent our intention she came home,
they started talking, and she went from
a very angry young girl
with a really angry MySpace page
to she converted her MySpace page
to pink, so...
(laughing)
I loved that.
I thought that was wonderful.
So with a group,
people can, obviously there’s a mechanism
here where people can join in with you,
and they can join with each other.
Let’s take it home to a really personal level.
Let’s say my mother was ill or not feeling well,
and I want to directly impact her.
How do you advise the individual
or walk them through the process
of really clean and powerful intention?
Okay, well first of all
I suggest that they try to take,
they create their own experiment at home.
So they take something in their life
that never happens, never happens,
so that if they send an intention
it’s more likely to be a result of their
activity and their thinking
than just chance.
So for instance if you’re a woman and
your husband’s never brought you flowers.
That’s a good one.
We’ve sent that a lot, we’ve said that a lot,
and people have tried this
and it’s been interesting.
I mean, one of the recent Valentine’s Days
I suggested people do this and we have it
as a running commentary on the web now
as to whether or not it’s working.
But I did this at one of my workshops,
and a young woman who said,
who was a participant there said,
“My husband never brings me flowers.”
So I said, “Okay, do it this weekend.”
So she did, and after the workshop
she wrote me and said,
“When I got home I opened up my door
“and there he was with a giant bouquet of roses.”
How wonderful!
So, yeah!
The power of thought.
That’s right.
So if you’re a man and you love, say, football,
and you’re being kind of gender, you know...
Biased for a moment.
Yeah, exactly.
You know, send an intention for your wife,
she can’t stand watching it with you,
send an intention that she’ll suddenly
like football and she’ll sit down and watch
with you, or if you have children who
don’t get to bed on time or don’t make their bed,
or something like that just send an intention
for that to change around and see what happens.
So we suggest that, and I also suggest that people
follow this program I’ve created called “Powering Up.”
And the reason I call it “Powering Up”
is because when people assume that when you
send intention and you get into these meditative states
your brain slows down.
But the studies show just the opposite of intention masters.
They show that when they go into an intense intention state,
the kind of state that allows a buddhist monk for instance
to heat up his body and change his body temperature
by 17 degrees or something, they’re in a state
where they start of in a meditative state,
their mind goes down and slows into an alpha-state,
and then eventually speeds up past beta
into a gamma-state, a state of hyper-alert.
I call it “going into hyperspace”
because in a sense you’re attending
to this at this moment.
You’re attending to things with every fibre of your being.
So we have, I have exercises in my book
to help people learn this kind of concentrated focus
and they can practice it just using a little
mindfulness meditation techniques,
which are focusing on something that you’re doing
right there in the present with all your five senses,
without judgement.
So it means you turn off the internal monologue
of what you were doing yesterday
and what you’re about to do tomorrow,
or that day, and you just
focus on what is; what’s going on at that moment.
And so that kind of intense mind-state,
which is hard for us to do without practice,
is very helpful in becoming a master intender,
because what you want to do is ultimately
keep into that focused state, and then
send your intention.
Other techniques are important.
Other techniques that are important include
choosing your intention space.
I suggest this because there’s a lot of
laboratory evidence showing that when they do
mind-over-matter experiments in the lab,
it works faster and better
as time goes on if they can carry out
those experiments in the same place over time.
So that suggests to me
that in a sense you create a sacred space
when you send intention in a space.
So it means just cleaning up and clearing up
one little place in your house,
or in your office or whatever,
that becomes your space.
And always sending intention from that space.
Now suppose you’re traveling.
You can still mentally travel to your space
and then send an intention there.
That’s a very good point, yes.
So there’s that.
There is forming a connection
with the object of your intention.
It’s amazing how many people
attempt to send intention,
and there have been certain prayer studies like this too,
where they haven’t worked, and in my view,
it has largely to do with the fact that
they aren’t zoned in on the object of their intention.
I mean, in some cases with prayer studies
they’ve asked people sending prayer
to certain patients without the prayers even
knowing who these patients are.
Not even being given their names.
So I think it’s important—
Not efficient.
Yeah, no, exactly.
It’s like dialing your phone without
knowing your full phone number.
So um, for me connection is really important.
Even if it’s holding somebody’s hand
for a couple of minutes.
Imagine what would happen
if healers, if doctors did this with their patients.
Yes.
Or even in the case of remote healing,
having a picture, just something.
Exactly.
A name, a location.
Some kind of identification factor
where you’re creating relationship.
Exactly, exactly.
That’s important.
Some sort of connection.
This concurrence of belief is really important.
Timing is even important.
I found a lot of evidence showing that we are
very much effected by solar activity
with intention.
Now, people aren’t aware of this,
but the sun is furious star.
The sun hurls a lot of gaseous stuff toward earth
at, you know, at huge speed, and when it does
those gaseous things like solar flares
hit the earth’s geomagnetic shield,
which surrounds the earth like a donut,
and that in turn has a profound effect on
two major engines or the human body:
the heart and the brain.
It also effects all living creatures too.
But with us, heart attack rates
start soaring, blood coagulates,
people have many more strokes,
people have more epileptic fits,
psychiatric admissions increase,
all that kind of stuff happens.
But it also seems to effect our psychic ability
and our ability to tap into the field.
When the sun is quiet and there isn’t much of this activity,
it seems that we are much better at things like ESP,
and tapping into that information field.
When it’s a little bit noisy it seems we have
a better effect on things like intention,
on mind-over-matter.
So I always suggest that people have a look,
if they have a really important intention,
have a look at what the sun’s doing.
Go to the NASA site?
Exactly.
And they have a daily record of what’s going on.
Right.
That’s a really key piece of information
that is almost completely overlooked.
Yes, and there’s a vast body of research about this,
and intention.
We’re not separate
from the cosmos.
Absolutely not.
We are not the ape at the apex of the energy system.
So to bring it all together here
and final words on this, because this is
an ongoing experiment, some of what you’re
putting together for the future
and again someone maybe watching this tomorrow
or a year from now, so let’s really
look at some of the projections you have
for this experiment.
Okay, well one other thing that we’re doing
is building a little mini GAIA, like an ecosphere,
which will be like a glass enclosed terrarium
housing some animals and plants
and we’re going to put a lot of measuring equipment
in there and we’re going to see if we can change
the CO2 levels, the carbon dioxide levels,
with our thoughts, if we can change the temperature
with our thoughts, and that will have,
once again, an enormous implication,
because this ongoing little experiment will be
in a sense a living and practiced demonstration
of what we can do to the earth
and how we can effect the earth,
and clean up the earth with our thoughts.
We’re also planning on things like trying to
improve the grade point average of children
in certain poor areas of America,
and other parts of the world.
And so it goes.
We’ve got many plans.
I’d love to go back to some of those initial ideas
of maybe helping children with attention deficit,
but I want to be really clear before we do that
that we are having positive effects.
Because you know, if we have 10,000 people
sending intention to one child,
we may blow this person’s head off.
So we don’t know yet.
I don’t think we will, but...
As Gary Schwartz says, we have to take baby steps here.
We do, and we have to start at home.
We have to, also what about just helping ourselves?
Well I think this is the other thing too,
is I really invite everyone to continue on with
intention experiments using these techniques,
trying them out at home, trying them with
situations that you’d like to change in your life,
and keeping a diary.
All you need is a notebook and a pen
and the will to change, and you too can find out
whether or not your thoughts can change your life.
(soft music)
To pick up a copy of ‘The Intention Experiment’
or her other renowned work called ‘The Field,’
just click on the link below.
Meanwhile you can take a look into
the work of some of Lynne’s associates
mentioned here on the site, namely
Gary Schwartz, Konstantin Korotkov,
and Russel Targ.
All of these scientists focus on
remote viewing, or the reading of subtle energies.
You might also want to check out Harry Oldfield.
Until next time, thanks for watching CMN.
(soft music)